In this lecture, you'll learn how to factory reset your router or switch and also how to do a password
recovery
if you've lost the enable password. So, factory reset first.
The way we do that, very simple, at
the enable prompt, we use the 'write erase' command. That will erase the startup-config.
You do that, you then reload the device, and it will boot up with a blank configuration.
There is no startup-config, so the Setup
Wizard will then run.
Let's have a look at how to do this in the lab.
So I'm on my router here, R1.
If I do a 'show running-config', you can see the hostname is R1 there, and if I do a 'show startup
config', the hostname is also R1 in the startup-config as well, so that has been saved. So what
I'll do here is I go to global configuration, and I'll say 'hostname R2', and I'm not doing a 'copy
run start' yet.
If I break back down to the enable prompt, if I do a 'show run', I've entered the command. So in the running
config, the hostname is R2.
If I do a 'show startup-config', you'll see I haven't saved it yet.
I didn't do the 'copy run start' yet, so that's still hostname R1 there.
So if I rebooted now, it would come back up with a startup-config. I would lose my unsafe changes, and
it would still have the hostname R1.
What this is useful for is if you lose connectivity to a device that you're working on remotely, you
can't get to it anymore.
You need to recover it.
You can ask some in the office to pull the power out and put the power back in.
It's not good because it does cause an outage. It's pretty embarrassing, but it's a way that you can get back
on to that router or that switch again.
Okay, so back to doing the factory reset.
I just want to show you first a bit of the running-config and startup-config. If I wanted to
factory reset this device, the command is, I'll do it and fill for you, 'write erase'.
It will then tell you that this is going to erase the NVRAM file system, which you know is where the
startup-config is saved. So, I'll hit Enter to confirm that. If I now do a 'show start',
it will tell me that my startup-config is not present.
It was erased. And if I 'reload' now and confirm that, it will take a minute to do the reload, and when it
comes back up, I can see it's running the Setup Wizard because it's got no configuration.
Okay, so that is how you do a factory reset on your router or your switch. We'll back to the slides now and
have a look about how to do the password recovery.
First, you need to know about the configuration register. That is used to change the way that the router boots
from the default.
You can use the 'config-register' command in global configuration mode, or if you're at the ROMMON
prompt to where the router or a switch hasn't completed booting yet, you can use the 'confreg' command.
For example, we could use 'config-register 0x2142' for that setting at global config or 'confreg
0x2142' if we were at the ROMMON prompt.
There's several different configuration registers that you can use, probably the three most useful.
First is 0x2102. That should be the default.
The device will boot normally when that is the setting. Next one is 0x2120, will boot into ROMMON mode.
And lastly, 0x2142 will ignore the contents of NVRAM while booting, so it will ignore the
startup-config.
Now, there are other settings you can use as well, which will mostly change the baud rate,
the rate at which you connect to the device.
I can't really think of any reason you would want to do that.
So, these are the three that you would commonly use.
Okay,
if we do need to do a password recovery, so this is where we've lost the enable prompt.
So, maybe it's a small company.
We just had one administrator there before, and unfortunately, they got hit by a bus,
or more happily, they've left the company, and they didn't let anybody know what the enable password was
before they left.
Or just as likely is that if you're in a large company, you take a router or a switch
out of a shelf, out of a cupboard somewhere, and you don't know what the enabled secret is. So it is quite common
that you will have to do this, not day to day, but every once in a while. In a real world environment,
you will have to do a password recovery.
The way you do it is, first off, Google for the instructions for this, because again, you're not going to
be doing it every day, and unlikely you're going to remember how you do this
off the top of your head.
I've done it probably hundreds of times, and I still Google for the instructions whenever I need to do
it.
So, first up is you don't have the enable password, so you can't get in to the device. You need to reboot it.
Then while it is rebooting, press the break sequence on the keyboard. That is commonly Ctrl + Break,
but it depends on which software you're using to connect to the console.
Again, you can Google if it's not Ctrl + Break.
Okay,
so do that during the first minute that the device is powering on, and that will break you into the ROMMON
prompt. You then enter the command 'confreg 0x2142' at the ROMMON prompt, which says to ignore
the startup-config on boot. Now, you're not deleting the startup-config like when we did a factory
reset. The startup-config is still there, and the full configuration, everything that was configured on that
device is there as well, like IP addresses or wherever. And also, the enable secret is still there, which
you don't know, but the router is not going to use that startup-config when it boots up, so you don't need
to know what the enable secret is. You then enter 'reset' at the ROMMON prompt to boot the device. The router
will boot up with no configuration, so it will enter the Setup Wizard. You then type 'no' to bypass that.
You then enter enable mode with the 'enable' command. You're not going to be prompted for the enable
secret because it's not in the current running configuration, which is blank.
Next thing you need to do is copy the startup-config to the running-config.
Do not forget that step. If you forget that step and you do everything else correctly like it says
here, you're going to end up factory resetting that device, and you will lose the previous config. If you're
doing a password recovery because the administrator left and you need to still have that configuration
there, that would be a big mistake because you don't
forget to copy the startup-config to the running-config at that point. That will copy the entire
previous configuration into the running-config, including the unknown enable secret. But you're already
in enable mode,
so again, you don't need to know what that enable secret was. You then enter a new enable secret in
global configuration mode to overwrite the old one, and that will go into the current running-config. Then
enter 'config-register 0x2102', so the router will boot normally on the next restart. Again,
don't forget to do this either because if you do, every time you boot up, it will boot up with a blank
config, and you're going to think there's something seriously wrong with that router. If you ever get
that symptom where every time you boot up, it looks like it's been factory reset,
it will be because the config register is set to 0x2102.
And lastly, we 'copy run start' to save the configuration, and you now are back to where you started,
except you're logged in, and you've got a new enable secret. Okay,
so that's how we do the recovery procedure on a router.
If you're on a switch, then it can be a little bit different depending on what model you're on.
Also, some routers can be slightly different as well.
So whatever kind of device is that you need to recover, it will be very, very similar to those instructions
I just showed you there,
but it might be slightly different.
So again, Google to get the instructions and just follow the instructions to do the password recovery.
Okay, let's have a look at
how to do this in the lab next.